#<a name = "top"></a> Alienation, Inertia, and Consciousness
###Reflections on Dostoyevsky's *Notes From Undergound*

The narrator, the Underground Man, is right to suppose that there is a more universal meaning to his story. The Underground Man’s notes should not be interpreted as merely the ravings of an isolated, idiosyncratic *underground dweller*. 

>[Y]ou may be angry with me for saying this, you will cry out against me and stamp your foot: ‘You are talking only about yourself and your underground miseries, don’t dare speak of ‘all of us!’ Excuse me gentlemen, I am not trying to excuse myself with that *allness*. As for what concerns me personally, after all I have only carried to a logical conclusion in my life what you yourselves didn’t dare take more than half-way; and you supposed your cowardice was common sense, and comforted yourselves with self-deception (p. 122-123).

Although the Underground man is alienating himself in his speech, pushing the reader away, perhaps reflecting mans alienation from the world. Dostoyevsky’s *Notes From Underground* reflect his thoughts concerning the human condition, what it is creating. “[W]e all show off with our diseases, and I, perhaps, more than anyone. Don’t let’s argue; I express myself clumsily. But all the same I’m firmly convinced that not only a great deal, but every kind, of intellectual activity is a disease” (p. 18). Dostoyevsky focuses on ‘real’ people, generally city dwellers, prostitutes. The Underground Man is critical of rational egoism and totalitarian visions of utopia. The Underground Man is a victim of the modern experience. 

>Not only couldn't I make myself malevolent, I couldn’t make myself anything: neither a scoundrel nor an honest man neither a hero nor an insect. Now I go on living in my corner and irritating myself with the spiteful and worthless consolation that a wise man can’t seriously make himself anything, only a fool makes himself anything. Yes, a man of the 19th century ought, indeed is morally bound, to be essentially without character; a man of character, a man who acts, is essentially limited (p. 16).

Deprived of positive social interactions, the Underground Man tries to relate to the world according to the codes and examples he finds in European literature. The failure of these attempts makes him even more bitter and isolated, driving him deeper underground.

The underground man emphasizes the point that he is the voice of the modern man. Sure, the underground man has been driven to madness through his lack of socialization and inability to socialize there of. But, the true author, Dostoyevsky, has not been driven to madness; it is he who is making this point. The Underground Man is a caricature of the modern man and what society and environment has made of him. The underground man is truly the picture of the modern man.

The *underground*, the *dark cellar* from which the Underground Man inhabits and writes his notes, is a symbol for his isolation and alienation from society. He feels rejected and shut out from the society to which he is supposed to belong, and he imagines that he is viewing the world through cracks in the floorboards. The Underground Man often claims, however, to prefer the underground to the real world above. He treasures the space the underground gives him to exert his individuality—one of the few things he possesses. At times I think of my own dorm as my own little cave, cut out and away from everything related to society.
	
Throughout the novel we see that the Underground Man is unable to make decisions or take action, it is his intense degree of consciousness that effects his actions. Suffering is doubt, negation, and is the sole cause of consciousness. The Underground Man is able to imagine the variety of consequences that every action could have, he is aware of the possible arguments that can be made against every statement, and he is conscious of the multiplicity of different motives that inform every decision he makes. What is it about this paper, writing it, that leaves me driven to inertia? The thought of thought and all the possibilities, and the roundabout way in which I accomplish nothing. It is evident to the Underground Man that every choice made is actually more complicated than one may first assume. With this complexity, every decision is then doubted and the best course of action is ambiguous.

The modern man is filled with a lack of certainty. We are groundless, radically free.

>[M]an, who ever he is, is always and everywhere likes to act as he choses, and not all according to the dictates of reason and self-interest; it is indeed possible, and sometimes positively imperative (in my view), to act directly contrary to one’s own best interests. One’s own free and unfettered volition, one’s own caprice, however wild, one’s own fancy, inflamed sometimes to the point of madness — that is the one best and greatest good, which is never taken into consideration because it will not fit into any classification, and the omission of which always sends all systems and theories to the devil. Where did all the sages get the idea that a man’s desire must be normal and virtuous? Why did they imagine that he must inevitably will what is reasonable and profitable? What a man needs is simply and solely independent volition, whatever that independence may cost and wherever it may lead. Well, but the devil only knows what volition... (p. 33-34)

In the past, when religion and morality ruled, people rested and were grounded, without question about action and decision, confident in the ‘laws’ and practices of society. “And why are you so firmly and triumphantly certain that only what is normal and positive — in short, only well-being — is good for man? After all, perhaps prosperity isn’t the only thing that pleases mankind, perhaps he is just attracted to suffering” (p. 41). In the modern era, however, most of these absolutes have dissolved. According to the Underground Man, the only people who can act with confidence are narrow-minded people who are too stupid to question themselves. 

>By the way, men like that, men of action, doers, quite genuinely give up when faced with a wall; to them a wall is not a challenge, as it is to us, for example, men who think and therefore don’t do anything; not is it an excuse for turning aside, an excuse that people like us are always glad of, even if we don’t usually even believe in it ourselves. No, they give up in all sincerity. A wall is for them something calming, morally decisive and final, perhaps even mystical… (p. 20)

An emotion such as revenge, being angry can ground someone. Being filled with this emotion impulse, nature, passion. But this is false and only temporary, another grounding is reason. Social ground beliefs of what is good.
	
The one remaining absolute, according to the Underground Man, is reason. Even educated men pursue the laws of science and reason without questioning them. Dostoyevsky’s Underground Man believes that such mindless adherence to the laws of reason is misguided. An active person with a totally fixed mind is more dangerous than an inactive person whose mind moves and changes.
	
I can relate to the Underground Man’s torment and regret (p. 105). I was tormented for a weekend by the fact that I said something in a way that may have been inappropriate, I cannot decide if what I said was uncalled for. This semester during a midterm, the professor left for a moment and a classmate began to talk about anything and everything, frustrated by this distraction, I exclaimed, “Would you please shut the f–k up?” Even though I clearly got my point across – I was able to complete the midterm in silence, I almost immediately regretted what I said, or rather how I said it. Tormented by this, I went to the classmate and apologized to her, hoping to relieve the torment brought on by my inappropriate social interaction. I found my apology left me unsatisfied; I realized I did not regret what I had said, and now regretted ‘taking it back’. Similar to the Underground Man’s response to his-own inappropriate behavior of intruding on a farewell party, my actions led to feelings of torment, isolation, alienation, and regret.

#####[Back to Top](#top)
