#<a name = "top"></a> Personality-Stress Associations: Hardiness and Other Personality Traits Attributed to Resilience to the Effects of Stress

Resilience can be characterized as adaptive responding to stressful or traumatic circumstances or events (Schaubroeck, 2011).  Self-esteem, optimism, Type-A personality, and neuroticiscm, for example, have all been examined as potential predictors of how one responds to stress (Cooper, Dewe, & O’Driscoll, 2001; Gunthert, Cohen, & Armeli, 1999; Maddi, 1999; Makikanagas & Kinnunen, 2003).  The purpose of this paper is to research the role of personality in moderating the effects of stress, to study how the stress response is shaped by enduring traits of the person.  Reflecting on how variability in stress processes reflect an individuals personality.
	
Stressors are conditions in one’s life that require an adaptive response and have the potential to cause illness.  Strains, on the other hand, are the negative health outcomes that one experiences as a result of being exposed to stressors (Eschleman, Bowling, & Alarcon, 2010).  Stress is the subjective feeling produced by events that are uncontrollable or threatening.  Stress is a response to the perceived demands in some situation (Larsen & Buss, 2009).  Stress processes—exposure, reactivity, recovery, and restoration—is a potential pathway to poor health.  Variability in these processes is generally believed to reflect, at least in part, an individuals personality (Williams, P. G., et. al. 2011).

Hardiness is a multidimensional personality trait that is hypothesized to protect people from the effects of stress (Eschleman, et al., 2010).  There are strong theoretical bases to expect that hardiness will be negatively associated with both stressors and strains (Kobasa, 1979; Kobasa et al., 1982).  Perceptual processes could explain the relationship between hardiness and stressors.  That is, hardy individuals may be predisposed to perceive few stressors in their environment (Eschleman, et al., 2010).

Hardiness, commitment, control, and challenge were generally positively associated with dispositions that have been shown to buffer against the effects of stressors (e.g., optimism), and negatively associated with dispositions that have been shown to worsen the effects of stressors (e.g., neuroticism). Additionally, we found that hardiness and the components were generally related to stressors and strains. These effects are likely because hardy individuals perceive fewer stressors and proactively address negative conditions. The fewer perceived and objective stressors, in turn, lead to less strain (Eschleman, et al., 2010).

Maddi’s studies (1999) suggest that hardiness expresses itself as a moment-to-moment sense of commitment, control, and challenge in person–environment interactions. Trait hardiness  predisposes one to rely on transformational rather than regressive coping in dealing with stressful events and decreases psychological and physical signs of strain.

There is evidence supporting the fact that hardiness should not be considered a unitary phenomenon, but rather assessed at the facet level (Hull et al., 1987).  Challenge is the most unique of the three hardiness components.  Researchers have argued that the challenge component could be dropped from the conceptualization of hardiness (Eschleman, et al., 2010).  	Hardy individuals are less likely experience less strain in the presence of a stressor than low hardiness individuals (Eschleman, et al., 2010).  Eschleman (2010) found that hardiness and the hardiness components were positively associated with social support.  Support is given to those individuals who are committed to many life domains and thus have a large social circle or it may result from hardy individuals being more socially attractive. Hardy individuals are also likely to have a repertoire of coping strategies that are more proactive than regressive. That is, a greater sense of control and commitment to an environment is likely to predispose an individual to address stressors rather than engage in withdrawal behaviors. In general, hardiness and the hardiness components generally led to higher ratings of school and work performance. 

Gils study (2005) focused on the role played by a pre-traumatic personality in the development of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).  In the study, one week after an explosion, a sample was assessed to determine actual exposure: 81 reported being exposed and thus constituted the ﬁnal cohort, re-evaluated at six months after the exposure both in terms of personality proﬁle and to determine formal diagnosis of PTSD.  A logistic regression analysis showed that age and the harm-avoidance personality dimension (i.e., avoiding novel stimuli) were positively associated with the risk for developing PTSD, and that the novelty-seeking dimension (i.e., seeking novel stimuli of excitement) was negatively associated with this risk.

The ﬁndings of Sharon Gil’s study (2005) demonstrate that the subjects with PTSD scored higher on the harmavoidance personality dimension and lower on the novelty-seeking dimension as compared to those without PTSD.  These dissimilarities between subjects with and without PTSD in terms of personality proﬁle were observed both before and after the terror attack, indicating that the personality proﬁle of all subjects tended to remain stable, regardless of the traumatic exposure.  High harm-avoidance and low novelty-seeking tendencies could be viewed as risk factors and predictors for the development of PTSD six months following exposure to a terror attack in this sample.

Harm avoidance is described as a tendency to respond intensely to signals of aversive and novel stimuli, manifested mainly in inhibition to explore unfamiliar or uncertain situations as well as passive avoidance of punishment and non-reward. Individuals with high harm-avoidance tendencies are described as being cautious, worriers, inhibited, tense and apprehensive, as well as responding intensely to previously established signals of aversive stimuli. Novelty seeking, by contrast, is described as a tendency toward intense exhilaration or excitement in response to novel stimuli and cues for potential rewards or potential relief, manifested in frequent exploratory activity in pursuit of potential rewards as well as active avoidance of monotony. Individuals who are low on this dimension are described as obsessive, passive-dependent, cyclothymic or schizoid, and as approaching novel stimuli cautiously (Cloninger, 1987).

Resilience can be characterized as adaptive responding to stressful or traumatic circumstances or events.  Schaubroeck, Riolli, Peng, and Spain (2011) studied the need for research on the experience of traumatic events, going beyond previous studies on traumatic life crises such as widowhood, rape, job loss, and other studies about the aftereffects of combat.  To investigate the effects of individual differences in resilience to potentially traumatic exposures, a trait version of an individual difference metaconstruct that has been labeled “positive psychological capital” was studied and was significantly associated with indexes of psychological and physical health.  These associations were found to be mediated by cognitive appraisals.  In addition, the relationships between trait Positive Psychological Capital and health symptoms were stronger in units with higher rated exposures to more potentially traumatic events, and the indirect influence on symptoms through cognitive appraisals was also stronger among soldiers assigned to these units.  Schaubroeck (2011) found the difference between persons with more and less resilient personalities lies not in how they cope with feelings associated with stress, but rather it is because they appraise the exposures as being less or more stressful.  

The most robust findings on the associations between personality and stress relate to the trait of Neuroticism, which has consistently been found to be associated with stress symptoms, with individuals scoring higher on Neuroticism reporting higher stress levels (Matthews, Deary, & Whiteman, 2003). Evidence has also been found for negative associations of stress with Extraversion and Conscientiousness (e.g., Deary et al., 1996; Vollrath, 2000). The consideration of coping styles and their relationships with personality gives further insight into these associations.  Key findings are of associations of emotion-focused coping with distress and worry (Matthews, Schwean, Campbell, Saklofske, & Mohamed, 2000) and of Neuroticism with emotion-focused coping and more generally with coping strategies that are classified as problematic or ineffective. By contrast Extraversion and Conscientiousness have been found to be associated with task-focused coping and with more generally adaptive coping strategies (Connor- Smith & Flachsbart, 2007; Hewitt & Flett, 1996).

Austin (2010) studied the associations among emotional intelligence, coping and personality and their relationships with both baseline stress levels reported by students and stress experienced in the immediate pre-exam period.  The expected correlation pattern of emotional intelligence and coping components emerged, with emotion-focused coping negatively associated with the Intrapersonal, General Mood and Stress Management Emotional Intelligence subscales, while task-focused coping was positively associated with Adaptability, and social diversion coping with Interpersonal Emotional Intelligence.

The positive relationships between hardiness and stress resistant personality traits, active coping strategies, and social support indicate that a hardy person will either have or obtain the resources needed to handle stressors.  These beneﬁcial characteristics of a hardy person are primarily driven by a sense of commitment to various life domains.  To a lesser degree, but nonetheless valuable, a sense of control and a tendency to perceive obstacles as challenges are important aspects of hardiness.  In short, hardiness is a valuable predictor of strain and explains unique variance in outcomes after controlling for other stress mitigating dispositions (Eschleman, et al., 2010). 

There is evidence (Eschleman, et al., 2010) that believing that one has control over the environment may cause one to proactively address potentially negative conditions before they become serious stressors. 

#####[Back to Top](#top)

>##<a name = "ref"></a>References

>>Austin, E. J., Saklofske, D. H., & Mastoras, S. M. (2010). Emotional intelligence, coping and exam-related stress in Canadian undergraduate students. Australian Journal of Psychology, 62(1), 42-50. doi:10.1080/00049530903312899

>>Burgess, L., Irvine, F., & Wallymahmed, A. (2010). Personality, stress and coping in intensive care nurses: A descriptive exploratory study. Nursing in Critical Care, 15(3), 129-140. doi:10.1111/j.1478-5153.2009.00384.x

>>Campbell-Sills, L., Cohan, S. L., & Stein, M. B. (2006). Relationship of resilience to personality,  coping, and psychiatric symptoms in young adults. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44(4), 585-599. doi:10.1016/j.brat.2005.05.001

>>Clements, A. D., & Bailey, B. A. (2010). The relationship between temperament and anxiety: Phase I in the development of a risk screening model to predict stress-related health problems. Journal of Health Psychology, 15(4), 515-525. doi:10.1177/1359105309355340

>>Cloninger, C. R. (1987). A systemic method for clinical description and classiﬁcation of personality variants. Archives of General Psychiatry, 44, 573–587. Cooper, C. L., Dewe, P. L., & O'Driscoll, M. P. (2001). Organizational stress: A review and critique of theory, research, and applications. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

>>Elliott, R., Sahakian, B. J., & Charney, D. (2010). The neural basis of resilience. In C. L. Cooper, J. Field, U. Goswami, R. Jenkins, B. J. Sahakian, C. L. Cooper, ... B. J. Sahakian (Eds.), Mental capital and wellbeing (pp. 111-118). Wiley-Blackwell. Retrieved from EBSCOhost.

>>Eschleman, K. J., Bowling, N. A., & Alarcon, G. M. (2010). A meta-analytic examination of hardiness. International Journal of Stress Management, 17(4), 277-307. doi:10.1037/a0020476

>>Gabdreeva, G. h., & Favorov, N. (2010). The psychological protection of personality under conditions of stress caused by forced isolation. Journal of Russian & East European Psychology, 48(2), 48-60. doi:10.2753/RPO1061-0405480204

>>Gil, S. (2005). Pre-traumatic personality as a predictor of post-traumatic stress disorder among undergraduate students exposed to a terrorist attack: A prospective study in Israel. Personality and Individual Differences, 39(4), 819-827. doi:10.1016/j.paid.2005.03.007

>>Koenen, K. (2010). Developmental origins of posttraumatic stress disorder. Depression and Anxiety, 27(5), 413-416. Retrieved from EBSCOhost.

>>Larsen, R.J., & Buss, D. M. (2009). Stress, Coping, Adjustment, and Health. Personality Psychology: Domains of Knowledge About Human Nature (4th ed.) (pp. 555). New York: McGraw-Hill. 

>>Luthans, F., Avolio, B. J., Avery, J. B., & Norman, S. M. (2007). Positive psychological capital: Measurement and relationship with performance and satisfaction. Personnel Psychology, 60, 541–572.

>>Maddi, S. R. (1999). The personality construct of hardiness: I. Effects on experiencing, coping, and strain. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 51(2), 83-94. doi:10.1037/1061-4087.51.2.83

>>Mancini, A. D., & Bonanno, G. A. (2010). Resilience to potential trauma: Toward a lifespan approach. In J. W. Reich, A. J. Zautra, J. Hall, J. W. Reich, A. J. Zautra, J. Hall (Eds.), Handbook of adult resilience (pp. 258-280). New York, NY US: Guilford Press. Retrieved from EBSCOhost.

>>Meyer, D. L. (2008). Exploration of trait anxiety, depression, and anger as moderators of reported traumatic stress symptomalogy in red cross disaster responders. Dissertation Abstracts International, 68, Retrieved from EBSCOhost.

>>Ronen, S., & Baldwin, M. W. (2010). Hypersensitivity to social rejection and perceived stress as mediators between attachment anxiety and future burnout: A prospective analysis. Applied Psychology: An International Review, 59(3), 380-403. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2009.00404.x

>>Schaubroeck, J. M., Riolli, L. T., Peng, A., & Spain, E. S. (2011). Resilience to traumatic exposure among soldiers deployed in combat. Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 16(1), 18-37. doi:10.1037/a0021006

>>Williams, P. G., Smith, T. W., Gunn, H. E., & Uchino, B. N. (2011). Personality and stress: Individual differences in exposure, reactivity, recovery, and restoration. In R. J. Contrada, A. Baum, R. J. Contrada, A. Baum (Eds.) , The handbook of stress science: Biology, psychology, and health (pp. 231-245). New York, NY US: Springer Publishing Co. Retrieved from EBSCOhost.
