#<a name = "top"></a> Research Proposal of the Perception of Facial Expression of Emotion as a Function of Adult Attachment

Attachment theory holds that the quality of attachment, attachment orientation (e.g., Rholes, Simpson, & Stevens, 1998), is related to the ways in which individuals manage their own emotions and respond to the emotions of others. The view, that the psychology and the psychopathology of emotion is found to be in large part the psychology and psychopathology of affectional bonds (Bolwby 1980), is supported by a number of studies concerning the types of emotion likely to be experienced in challenging and distressing situations, and the strategies for emotion regulation preferentially used, as a function of attachment orientation and its support- seeking requirements and expectations (e.g., Bartholomew, 1990; Kobak & Sceery, 1988).

Attachment orientation influences emotional expression and regulation after distress has already been provoked (Niedenthal 2002). In theory, attachment orientation is represented as a working mental model. This suggests that individual differences in attachment orientation also moderate the perception of emotional information. Working models are thought to influence not only the way people organize their behavior but also the way in which they perceive, attend to, and process information of emotional significance (Niedenthal, Brauer, Robin, & Innes-Ker, 2002). Attachment orientation may influence the attention to and the encoding of emotional information from the external environment (e.g., Feeney, Noller, & Callan, 1994). Individual differences in the encoding of emotional stimuli may therefore determine reactions to previously observed attachment-related behaviors.

Attachment orientations have been shown to be associated with specific patterns of emotional responses and emotion regulation strategies (e.g., Bartholomew, 1990; Griffin & Bartholomew, 1994; Mikulincer & Florian, 1998). It appears that secure individuals respond effectively to displays of emotion expressed by attachment figures, and can cope with their own emotions as well (e.g., Kobak & Hazan, 1991). Secure individuals seek intimacy, and, when distressed, expect and accept support from intimate others (Mikulincer & Florian, 1998; Simpson et al., 1992). In contrast, theory and research suggests that dismissing-avoidant individuals have perfected a strategy of denying the need for intimate relationships. They also repress negative emotions that stem from rejection (e.g., Simpson & Rholes, 1994), often by orienting attention away from conflict and negative attachment issues (Simpson, Rholes, & Phillips, 1996). Preoccupied individuals have a strong need for intimacy. They are also highly sensitized to negative emotional signals from attachment figures and are concerned about the meaning of those cues for the stability and quality of the intimate relationship (Bowlby, 1980).

Consequently, these individuals respond intensely to negative emotional input, and cope poorly with their own emotional responses, perhaps by directing too much attention to them (Shaver & Hazan, 1993). Fearful-avoidant individuals shy away from emotional information, fearing that positive input will not be forthcoming and that negative information is probable. They are thought to try to minimize intimacy to minimize the pain of disappointment and rejection (Bartholomew & Horowitz, 1991).

Researchers have found that highly anxious people were faster to make lexical decisions in response to the names of their attachment figures. This finding suggests that anxious adults may be more sensitive to cues that are relevant to the functioning of the attachment system (Mikulincer, Gillath, and Shaver, 2002). One of the most important types of emotional information encountered in social interaction is that of facial expression of emotion (Darwin, 1872/1965). The lack of influence of attachment orientation in the perception of sad faces in Niedenthal’s study (2002) and in the perception of happy faces in the study, relies on a particular interpretation of what those expressions mean under conditions of no distress and distress. The purpose of this study is to examine facial expressions that have even less relevance to social interaction and to support.

##<a name = "Method"></a>Method

###Participants

One-hundred and fifty people will complete the Bartholomew and Horowitz (1991) Relationships Questionnaire (RQ), which contains four paragraphs that describe prototypic examples of four attachment orientations: secure, preoccupied, fearful avoidant, and dismissing avoidant. Respondents will choose the paragraph that best described how they feel about their intimate relationships. Individuals from all four categories will be call back in order to recruit equal numbers of participants of each attachment orientation until eventually 150 individuals, between 35 and 40 in each category, agree to participate in a study of face perception. (Assignment of participant to attachment orientation group will be determined by measurement during the subsequent laboratory session.) Participants will receive either course credit for their psychology class or payment ($5) for their efforts.

###Materials and Procedure

Participants will answer 40 questions designed to assess their attachment orientation across four kinds of intimate relationships (i.e., relationships with mother, father, romantic partners, and best friends). For each item, participants will be asked to click on a continuous scale to indicate the extent to which they agreed or disagreed with the item. The items will be derived from the ECR-R, an attachment inventory designed to assess the two fundamental dimensions underlying attachment patterns (Fraley, Waller, & Brennan, 2000). We will separately average responses to the anxiety and avoidance items across the four relational targets to create composite indices of global attachment-related anxiety and avoidance (Fraley, Niendenthal, Marks, et al. 2006).

The morph movies will be generated by taking a digital image of an actor instructed to express happiness, sadness, disgust, confusion, or anger and morphing that image into one in which the same actor was instructed to pose in an emotionally neutral fashion. The images will be taken from the MacBrain Face Stimulus Set, an archive of emotion faces that have been pretested for a variety of characteristics. The emotions conveyed in the specific images we selected had been correctly identified by over 99% of children and adults who had been asked to judge the emotional expressions in previous work. Will use a digital morphing program (Abrosoft, 2004) to produce a digital movie composed of 100 facial composites, such that successive composites changed in a mathematically equal degree toward the neutral face. Five separate faces will be used for each of five emotions (i.e., anger, disgust, confusion, sadness, and happiness), yielding 25 morph movies in all. The movies will be displayed in a 170 x 225 pixel frame. The order in which they were shown was randomized for each participant.

The instructions will state that participants will be viewing a series of 25 movies in which an actor begins by expressing an emotion (anger, disgust, confusion, happiness, or sadness) that gradually fades. Participants will be instructed to watch the full movie once and then to watch it a second time and press the ‘‘stop’’ button at the point at which they think the person in the clip is no longer expressing the original emotion. Once the movie loads, participants will watch the complete movie. The movie will then be played again, and participants stop it at the point at which they think the original expression had disappeared from the face. Participants will be allowed to fine-tune their stopping point by pressing ‘‘back’’ and ‘‘forward’’ buttons to move through the movie one frame at a time. When the participant are satisfied with the offset frame, he or she will press a button to advance to the next movie.

When all 25 trials are completed, the participants will be asked to provide some demographic information. After the data had been submitted, the Web script will provide the participant with detailed feedback about his or her attachment patterns in different relationships, as well as a summary of the point at which he or she stopped the morph movies and the point at which other participants in the sample had done so.

*Study 2*

The second study is replication of the first, with one major change. The second study involves inducing a level of distress in participants, using a procedure developed by Simpson et al. (1992). Participants who are recruited with the same procedure as that followed in the first study are asked to participate in two separate studies. The first study is described as a simple computer task concerned with face categorization, and the second is a physiological study, which requires that a baseline pulse be taken. After the pulse is taken, the experimenter continues the distress induction by reading a description, based on that used by Simpson et al., (1992), which indicates that the second study typically evokes heightened anxiety and distress in participants, failing to disclose details about the procedure of the study. After the paragraph is read to the participants, they will be encouraged to look into the room where the procedures are supposedly going to take place; the “distressing room,” a dimly lit office at the end of a hall. A large machine that measures heart rate, systolic blood pressure, and diastolic blood pressure will be placed in between a TV monitor and a computer on a desk. Unattached wires will sit in disarray over the machine and tabletop so that the equipment appears unassembled and an old wooden chair with wires attached to it will be placed in front of the desk. The experimenter mentions that the equipment was not ready, but would be by the time participants completed the computer task. After participants look into the room, they receive further instructions and there anxiety levels are measured before and after morph task.

###Predicted Results

Disgust and confusion could be argued to communicate little about interpersonal interaction at all, and very little about the availability of the expresser to provide support to a distressed perceiver. Thus, across the kinds of studies conducted here, involving no distress and distress, we would expect attachment orientation to play no role in the perception of the offset of a confusion or disgust expression. Under conditions of distress, we predicted differences among the attachment orientation groups in the perception of offset of the negative facial expressions of sadness and anger, but not in the perception of confusion, disgust or happy expressions. Results are expected to be similar to those findings of Niedenthal, Brauer, Robin, and Innes-ker (2002).

>###<a name = "Ref"></a>References

>>Abrosoft (2004). FantaMorph (Version 2.5) [computer software]. http://www.abrosoft.com/.

>>Bartholomew, K. (1990). Avoidance of intimacy: An attachment perspective. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 7, 147–178.

>>Bartholomew, K., & Howrowitz, L. (1991). Attachment styles among young adults: A test of the four-category model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 61, 226–245.

>>Bowlby, J. (1969). Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York: Basic Books.

>>Bowlby, J. (1973). Attachment and loss: Vol. 2. Separation. New York: Basic Books.

>>Darwin, C. (1965). The expression of the emotions in man and animals. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. (Original work published 1872)

>>Feeney, J. A., Noller, P., & Callan, V. J. (1994). Attachment style, communication, and satisfaction in the early years of marriage. Ad- vances in Personal Relationships, 5, 269–308.

>>Fraley RC, Niedenthal PM, Marks M, Brumbaugh C, Vicary A (2006) Adult attachment and the perception of emotional expressions: Probing the hyperactivating strategies underlying anxious attachment. Journal of Personality 74: 1163–1190.

>>Fraley, R. C., Waller, N. G., & Brennan, K. A. (2000). An item response theory analysis of self-report measures of adult attachment. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 350–365.

>>Mikulincer, M., & Florian, V. (1998). The relationship between adult attachment styles and emotional and cognitive reactions to stressful events. In J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and close relationships (pp. 143–165). New York: Guilford Press.

>>Mikulincer, M., Gillath, O., & Shaver, P. R. (2002). Activation of the attachment system in adulthood: Threat-related primes increase the accessibility of mental representations of attachment figures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 881–895.

>>Rholes, W. S., Simpson, J. A., & Stevens, J. G. (1998). Attachment orientations, social support, and conflict resolution in close relationships. In J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), Attachment theory and close relationships (pp. 46–76). New York: Guilford Press.

>>Shaver, P. R., & Hazan, C. (1993). Adult romantic attachment: Theory and evidence. In D. Perlman & W. Jones (Eds.), Advances in personal relationships (Vol. 4, pp. 29–70). London: Jessica Kingsley.

>>Simpson, J. A., & Rholes, W. S. (1994). Stress and secure base relation- ships in adulthood. In K. Bartholomew & D. Perlman (Eds.), Attachment processes in adulthood (pp. 181–204). London: Jessica Kingsley.

>>Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Nelligan, J. S. (1992). Support seeking and support giving within couples in an anxiety-provoking situation: The role of attachment styles. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62, 434–446.

>>Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Phillips, D. (1996). Conflict in close relationships: An attachment perspective. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 899–914.
